You've received more cooperation in terms of
large missions, joint cooperations,
oceanographic institutions, international
cooperation in terms of working the deep seas.
I
suppose so. I think now it's possible for people to
travel. world's become smaller and we also have a
closer personal relationship with foreign
scientists so we but we can do this in a more
meaningful and workable way before it was mainly a
matter of sort of hands across the seamanship of
meeting people from foreign countries and doing
good things and but now i think it'll become more
more meaningful and getting just the people you
want i mean it'll be based more upon their
scientific capability in which you're going to
get out of it rather than just being more or less a
social thing, social phenomenon. So I think
the...
In other words, we will find talent wherever it is
regardless of nationality. And people that have
common interests or have compatible interests
will work together and cooperate in a much more
productive and meaningful way. So I think
there'll be more cooperation. I would hope that
there's a tendency, of course, to establish very
large projects. And this is typical in the
meteorology field where you have had a series of
major expeditions which involve tens of millions
of dollars of input and Bomex and various things
and these are these are
extremely expensive and I guess it's one way of
kind of organizing in a way where you can get some
funding on this level because you by having a large
project you can go to the top so to speak and and get
you get support but
myself I personally not I don't like to be involved
in these things because you're You spend so much
time in the mechanics of organizing committee
meetings and organizing things, and I'm afraid
the, for example, the IPOD,
the International Phase of Ocean Drilling, deep
sea drilling project has been a great success, but
of course very expensive. The Mohul project
became defunct. And thank God it did. I mean, this
was totally out of hand. The conceptually wrong
became a political project. There was a contract
given to the wrong company and so forth and so on. So
when it died, it had a few friends left in the
scientific community. And it was being more or
less kept afloat only by a few political
interests. But then we this fell apart and we
regrouped as a deep-sea drilling project, which
was fine. It was really what was suggested in the
first place by such people as Miliani that we
should take sediment cars. But now this is the iPod
and as an outsider looking at it, it's become
enormously complex because it's The number of
committees and subcommittees and world
traveling involved in the organization is
becoming highly, highly complex. But I suppose
that in
the long run, the results will become more
meaningful, too. It's very difficult. Well, you
can get money for expeditions and for big
projects, but it's very difficult to get funding
to work up the results. And this always has been
this way, I guess it always will be. I hope they
become more sophisticated and can learn that or
somehow organize things to make sure the results
do in fact get published. It has also been
suggested now that the emphasis is on the ocean as
being a productive unit, that more and more it'll
be difficult to work in the deep water. And more and
more oceanographers will concentrate upon
things like the Gulf Shelf. Would you agree
with that? Well, this is true now. It may be a
passing phase. I mean, these are things which
hopefully a man can solve. And this will be a great
difficulty for the next decade. I see that in the
1980s that this matter of legal boundaries and
working having nations controlling the seas
after 200 miles, this divides the ocean up into a
great many private domains and this becomes very
ponderable and people go shy away from it. I worked
off Africa as a chief scientist on one of our ships
and we had to get these permissions. These
permissions eventually came through, but nearly
always too late. We already had left the area. And
it raised havoc with all of our programs to try to do
something in terms of reference of these. I mean,
we had to, for example, we had to program our ship to
be in Dakar. And because there was an election
going on, and on a certain day, we had to be we were
imposed upon by our own State Department to be out
of Dakar, I don't know, five days before the
election and not back in until two days after.
Otherwise, it would appear there was some sort of
show of U.S. force on the elections that we were
showing the flag. So we had to, anyway, this is
maybe one thing like that you can live with. But
suppose you have a dozen to live with and you have an
operation on the African coast and you try to
arrange your plans to fit into all these
requirements, it becomes just totally
impossible to operate.
Do you feel there's been a proliferation of
universities offering degrees in oceanography?
Yes, I think probably too many. I
read recently here that there are 10,000
unemployed divers, and I'm sure this is an
underestimate. And the Florida Institute of
Technology is hoping to improve this by
developing a course in superdivers, whereby
diving is just sort of an adjunct to something they
can do as a technician, which is the way it should
be. But oceanographers are being probably
overproduced. There's been no... Oceanography
has been entirely a sort of government-supported
activity, unless we enlarge the definition of
oceanography to include fishing and merchant
marine and such things as that. So it's
become a very large science and probably out of
proportion to the employment in the field. So it's
very difficult, I think, for... oceanographers
to my unemployment. And, well, it was very
difficult when I began, too. And this is because
there were none. There was no precedent. Come in. I
rather
suspect that when... When I first began, I got my
degree as a Ph.D. in geology, marine geology.
Just before the war, Ken Emery, who was much more
aggressive or energetic than I am, he wrote 146
letters looking for a position. And he was a Phi
Beta Kappa, and he had all sorts of top
credentials. He didn't get one favorable reply. I
sat back while he wrote his letters and encouraged
him. And I thought he'd get two replies, and I'd be
like Avis. I would try to be second best, you see,
and pick up something he didn't take.
All I corresponded to, he got no replies.
Of course, there was no sort of counseling service
to act for you. No one knew what an oceanographer
was, a marine geologist was. All companies didn't
recognize the sub-discipline. Well, it almost
seems, if an outsider looks in upon your
profession, that immediately after the war, that
ONR and the National Science Foundation sit out to
encourage the development of oceanography
departments. They'd say, we need to have somebody
in chemical oceanography, let's say, and there's
not anything really organized. Let's see if we can
build a department at X university to do such.
Is that the way you perceive the broadening of the
field of oceanography academically? Yes, it was
well organized from within whereby it was an
attempt by NSF and ONR and other groups to
Establish the Sea Grant schools, which was, of
course, Spillhouse was instrumental in, and so
But also there was a great interest on a part of the
populace and universities to in fact do it because
it is a very exciting field and We did have people
like Cousteau and do have him around which have
given a very glossy view of oceanography. Most
oceanographers are critical of Cousteau, and I
suppose I am too, although he's a very good friend
of mine, and I've sailed in a ship and admire him.
He's been a great spokesman for oceanography, and
I really admire what he's done. But at the same
time, people do misinterpret what his role is.
It's like
It's like thinking Ronald Reagan is a president
rather than a movie actor or something like that.
You have to recognize that. And so,
and there's been a great many people just come to
you all the time in droves and say, well, my son
likes to die. He wants to become an ocean armor
permit. And this, of course, is like saying, I know
how to type. I want to become a historian. Yeah,
right. Would you suggest, if one wanted to become
an oceanographer, that he be trained as an
undergraduate in a hard science rather than a
general degree in oceanography? In general, yes.
And I think there's room for both programs. And
Texas A&M and FIT and University of Washington, of
course, have this undergraduate program. So I
think there's room for all approaches.
I think that
we need more ocean technicians, perhaps, and if
you take a hard science, I think you're more or less
preparing, and you go towards a PhD program,
you're more or less preparing yourself for a
career as a research scientist. this this uh this
field of creating research science is probably is
overpopulated i mean there's too much emphasis
upon the upon the the phd upon academic science and
not enough upon
other approaches to but i i in spite of the fact
where i say that we may be over producing
oceanographers Let's face it, we're
overproducing maybe historians and psychology
majors in even greater numbers, aren't we? So
if we're overproducing in a field, I think it
should be in a field of
technology, of science. I think these people do
become... useful citizens and useful and
employable people. Even though they may not end up
in their chosen field, I think they become highly
employable people. And so these people that are
trained in oceanography
are not pumping gas. They're employable people
and they're doing things. I don't know what
they're doing. I don't know where they all go. But
they do end up having useful careers in general. I
realize that no one has any luck on predicting the
future. However, let me offer you perhaps a chance
to. It seems as if about the time that you enter the
field of oceanography, that may I say the hot
fields in oceanography are really marine geology
and then works with charting and mapping,
particularly moving towards charting and
mapping in the deep oceans. physical
oceanography. Then, with the explosion of the
bomb, then the hot field tends to be physics and
physics and oceanography. What would you suggest
in what direction the future in oceanography will
be?
Well, the explosion of the bomb, there was a great
proliferation of nuclear physicists, and these
were the There's remarkable prestige associated
with being a nuclear physicist to the point that
they even got... Any nuclear physicist was a great
man regardless of what he did. And even if he was a
poor one, he could be the head of an oceanographic
laboratory
by his prestige. But...
In oceanography, the future...
Well, the greatest success in oceanography, I
think, has been the concept of plate tectonics. If
you look at a new textbook in geology, I taught
geology at Washington
last semester, There only are two new chapters in
classical geology. One concerns planetology,
the planets. The other really concerns plate
tectonics, the new model of the world. These are
the two new things. And of course, plate tectonics
is mainly based upon the data of marine geology and
geophysics. It's a triumph, really, for
understanding the ocean floor. And the whole
field of plate tectonics is likely to be a very
bright field. for many years. I mean, for several
decades we will be making very useful results in
understanding earthquake prediction and
mechanics of the Earth's surface and
interpreting these in terms of mineral deposits.
So, I think there's a, while the frontier may not be
quite endless, there is still a great frontier and
in the oceans and it is deep oceans are 60% of the
earth and so there's an enormous amount of work to
be done in marine geology and I think there will be
very exciting discoveries and it's a very
very promising field
I think that the Earlier, we were talking about
large projects, one of these large projects,
which is, you know, like the International
Oceanographic Expedition was based upon,
really, it's a geographic thing. There are other
large projects which are ongoing and which are
based on problem solving. Now, the CLIMAP
program, understanding more about past climates
in terms of bringing together people who can do
this thing all over the world, both on land and in
the sea, looking at deep sea sediments. This is a
very fine project. And I'm sure that there'll be
some great results coming from Climap. And a good
part of this input will be marine geologic. But
we'll learn more to understand more about how the
Earth really works, not only the the crust but also
the ocean itself. I don't think even today we know
what would happen if we dammed the Straits of
Gibraltar.
We know that there's a water mass coming out of
there which is warm and saline and becomes
mid-water, North Atlantic mid-water and can be
observed up off Ireland.
And this is a very important oceanic phenomenon.
But how it affects climates, nobody knows. You
could build a scenario saying it would cause the
earth to get colder by blocking the straits, or you
can make a scenario equally rational saying the
world might get warmer, you see. So we don't really
know the effects of oceanography
on the scale where we can really understand the
ocean of the world. This is something which will be
forthcoming. What happens when we block the
Bering Sea or something like the Bering Straits?
What would happen if we have a sea level canal going
through Panama?
Now the other thing which is developed in
oceanography, which is very important, is
satellite oceanography. Because we'll have a sea
satellite,
SeaSat-1, I guess be launched in a couple of years
from now. And we'll be able to, for the first time,
to get a synoptic view of the ocean, know what's
going on. I guess every 18 days we'd occupy the same
station. And so the state of the sea can be
assessed, the roughness and warmth and so forth.
And so this whole idea of remote sensing of the
ocean is a new and bright field. And I guess to
process the data involved in Seasat will take an
enormous group of people to process that data. And
of course, when you do have a synoptic view of the
ocean it'll in turn give us some sort of a long-term
view of climate and it'll be enormously
profitable too because if we can predict climate
or predict these things seem to be rather small
problems but they have enormous consequence i
mean in terms of their economic spinoff involved
in understanding the climate just a little bit
more
will make oceanography probably an economic
thing to really understand more about the world.
So things like this, I think, have a very bright
future. Remote sensing, plate tectonics of the
ocean floor,
learning more about the total, the picture of the
ocean, the climate project and things of that are
very useful and very important programs. Now
in terms of oceanographic training or training
for oceanographers then, Would you suggest that
oceanographers will spend more time at sea or less
time at sea? Will they spend more time trying to
sort through the data they already have in terms of
now the new impact of the computer, or will there be
more sea voyages?
Well, I...
I guess it would be more steady state. You wouldn't
really, you can see more reason to, certainly with
satellites, you can, this will be at the need for
some surface observations. And with remote
sensing from aircraft and use of submarines and
DRVs, deep submersibles,
these,
Oceanography may be done in a different way. Now,
of course, the primary vehicle of oceanography is
the surface ship, and it probably will remain so,
but it'll be supplemented to a much more important
degree by satellite oceanography and other
techniques of data gathering. The science is only
as good as instrumentation But once you develop a
new instrument, it really opens up
enormous possibilities. For example, the advent
of echo sounding.
And we get to the point where we really think we can
see the ocean floor. We see mountains in our minds
and so forth. Of course, we've never seen it.
That's all. But in our minds, we think we see the
ocean floor. But
the other thing which has been an enormous
development has been the reflection profile
whereby we get sort of an x-ray radiographic
vision of the sediments, their thickness on the
ocean floor. And once we improve this technique,
its resolution, Or once we get more powerful tools
whereby we can, say, bounce echoes off the moho,
this justifies a whole new survey of the ocean for
this purpose alone. And so the more we know about
problems, the more problems that we really
generate. And I guess in a very social way, also, we
People have to keep busy. They have to keep
employed, you know. They have to have. And so
we're not going to get to the point where we just sit
around and sit on our data doing anything. We're
always going to be looking for new problems to
solve. And some of these problems, even if they're
non-problems, we're going to try to solve them. I
wondered perhaps if maybe this romantic
attraction to the sea that took people like you and
Emory and Shepard to the sea, if this may... maybe
through for oceanographers, maybe if they should
work more with satellites or what have you, maybe
the day-by-day getting your foot wet, as Ravel
said, may be gone. Well,
perhaps so. I think there's something to this, but
it may also be aging on the part of Ravel and myself
and other people. I think young people are bound to
be romantic, and they're bound to have this.
Certainly people that... in the scuba diving
community, for example. They're highly caught up
with the romance of the sea. And we don't see any let
up in
people being interested in sailing and boating.
Of course, when we first worked off California, we
worked in sort of frontiers. We were going out and
just going along the long California coast or out
to the islands. These were sort of unknown
territories then, which few people had visited.
And now, of course, they're highly populated. The
whole thing has changed. So I think
that people like Ravel and some of the early
people, they did things of the missionary zeal.
They weren't in it as more or less as a way of making a
living. They were in it just for the romance of the
sea. The sea was very mysterious then. It's less so
now because we know more about it. And I guess as we
begin to understand the world better,
people still look for mysticism. I mean, more than
half the world believes in UFOs. Some 80% of the
people believe in horoscopes or something like
that. They believe in the effect of of stars have
upon their birth, although one would think that
the moment they were conceived would be more
important than when they're actually born, more
or less like their Chinese birthday. You see, when
you're in China, when you're born, you're a year
old on whatever their New Year's is. And if you're
born the day after their New Year's, which is
something like February 20th, you're two years
old. You're another year old. So you can be two days
old, and you can be two years old.
And the gravitational effect of Jupiter on me is no
greater than the effect of you sitting there on me.
And the gravitational effect of you is larger.
But people persist in looking for mysticism in the
world, and always will. And there's a need for it, I
suppose. And the more we open up a rational world,
the more people will seek out mysticism. And so you
think the romance of the sea will continue to
attract young people into oceanography? I think
it will, yes. The romance of the sea will continue
to. And
it remains fascinating, it really does,
particularly all aspects of the sea. The life in
the sea is much more diverse than life on land, the
invertebrates and the types of animals there. So,
and to me, it still is a very remarkable
environment. And so I think the romance of the sea
will certainly remain.